Introduction
	There is a huge concern and discussion surrounding the lack of women within science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). This discussion is particularly important in the STEM subcategory of computer science, which is actually working backwards against the progression of other STEM fields that are moving toward equal gender distribution [CITE npr Why Women Stopped Coding). So, for the moment, let's look at the issue from the larger perspective of STEM, keeping in mind that computer science is perhaps the greatest hindrannce to the larger group acheiving a more balanced gender demographic. There are essentially two views dominating the discussion. One side argues that the missing demographics may simply be due to a lack of personal interest by the underrepresented and, therefore, the solution need only focus on making appeals to draw women into STEM fields. The other side blames shortcomings in the system of education that leave the underrepresented unprepared or unwilling to enter a STEM field, arguing that formal measures be taken to address and defuse these problems. Further consideration of this debate reveals two competing ideologies regarding where the responsibility of a demographic shift really lies.
Body
	Side X: Lack of Interest
		Intro
			Many believe this problem of underrepresentation may simply be due to a lack of interest in STEM fields from women in general. While at first this may seem too simple, there is a good amount of data that supports this conclusion. Researchers have looked into this suspicion with surprising results and have, therefore, concluded that the work of balancing demographics within STEM fields should primarily be focused on creating a cultural atmosphere which draws in more women. More potently, the idea is that it is an individual personal choice not to enter a STEM field, and as a generalization, women are more likely to make this choice.
		Body
			A. More career options
				One such concept looks beyond STEM education alone, and finds a simple explanation for the gender gap: perhaps women just have more options. A recent study by [], reveals this in an interesting way. Operating on the assumption that greater math skills make a person more likely to enter a STEM field, researchers compiled a group of nearly 1,500 12th grade students and, using SAT scores, evaluated their mathematical and verbal abilities. Years later when the students were turning 33 years old and had had time to settle into a career, the researchers surveyed them again to see what sort of fields the students had entered. As expected, students with a higher proficiency in mathematics were more likely to have chosen a STEM career—but only the students that scored well in mathematics alone, with their languages skills being lesser. Students that had been indentified as highly proficient in math and language, however, were less likely to enter a STEM field. The important discovery was this: women were more likely to be highly proficient in both mathematics and language, and indeed held the majority with females comprising 63 percent of the group. This, Wang et all believes, "may result in females having a wider choice of careers, in both science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and non-STEM fields, compared with males" [CITE]. In other words, the gender gap does not exist because women are less capable, but perhaps for the very opposite reason. The study reveals that women actually tend to have a greater variety of employable skill and may therefore choose to put those skills to work wherever they please; which, happens to be outside the realm of STEM.
			B. Why don't they like STEM?
				There is, however, a flaw in this idea. Perhaps the group of students identified as being highly proficient in both math and language did not enter a STEM field because the majority of them were women, and there may be something else that is keeping women from STEM careers. In other words, if women are less likely to enter STEM, and women are more likely to be proficient in math and language, then of course a group of people selected for being proficient in math and language will be less likely to enter STEM: that group will mostly be women, and women are less likely to enter STEM. The flaw in this idea is that it is circular, making it irrational to attempt to mark any particular place as either the beginning or the end. It is a classic chicken-and-egg situation: you cannot say what came first. Wang et all, however, anticipated this problem. The 12th graders were evaluated not only on their performance, but were also given a survey of their interest in STEM related material. This is how the researchers came to the conclusion that women were simply choosing other fields: they lacked interest. [STAT][CITE]. This reveals that the problem is, perhaps, not a systemic one. That is, it is not a situation in which women who would otherwise love to pursue a STEM career are implicitly hindered from doing so. It may not be a problem at all, it may simply be a matter of generalized personal choice and gender preference blown up to the national scale.
			C. Initiative Problem			
				Where this side of the debate really defines itself, however, is its dissapproval of the STEM pipeline: a collection of initiatives meant to incentivize and streamline the graduation process for women and underrepresentened minorities into further STEM education and careers. They argue that formal initiatives, such as the pipeline, end up being counterproductive: they reinforce, and perhaps even create negative cultural ideas that effect the recipients on micro and macro levels. Elizabeth Patitsas, a PhD candidate in computer science education at the University of Toronto explores this in her peer reviewed article, "Evaluating Diversity Initiatives in Computer Science: Do They Have Unintended Side-Effects?". Patitsas cites research that suggests affirmative action can stand as a constant reminder of the student's minority status, which in turn envokes "stereotype threat" [CITE]. Stereotype threat is the previously discussed idea that simply being reminded of potential stereotypes generally causes decreased performance, especially for underrepresented groups [CITE-stereotype study]. Patitsas also discusses the tendency of these initiatives to create gender- or minority-specific honors, awards, grants and so on. The problem with this is that "women in STEM are more likely to have lower self-esteem for only being good enough for the 'women’s grant [or award or honor]'" [CITE]. In other words, to them their acheivement is diminished because the competition was only amongst the minority of the field. Not only is their own view diminished, but that of their peers, as she explains "studies of female programmers have found that women associated with affirmative action are viewed as less competent than women not associated with affirmative action." This means the initiatives disrupt the individual recipient's view of themself, as well as the view from everyone around them. Success quickly becomes difficult in the face of such adversity and doubt, and perhaps these initiatives deserve part of the blame for actually keeping women out of STEM.
		Conclusion
			This determines the position that the lack of diversity within STEM, and particularly within computer science and software development, may be due to cultural preference. This especially tends to be the guiding narrative when this side considers the matter of underrepresented women: it is, essentially, gender preference that keeps women from entering the field. Therefore, formal initiatives should be avoided as they have only seemed to make the matter worse. 
	Side Y: Pro-Initiative
		Intro
			The other side of this debate, however, argues that these initiatives are indeed necessary. Washington Post writer Joann Weiner paraphrases Meghan Groome, the executive director of education and public programs at the New York Academy of Sciences, who argues that "almost all of the factors that drive women out of the STEM jobs are cultural" [CITE]. Groome's point is that it is not a question of ability or interest, but things like sterotypical gender indenties that keep women from STEM. These problems are not only apparent in popular culture, but throughout the system of STEM education.
		Body
			A. Cultural Issues
				Eileen Pollack, who, in 1978, was one of the first women to recieve a bachelor of science degree in physics from Yale, illustrates how these cultural sterotypes are promoted in her New York Times article, "Why Are There Still So Few Women in Science?" She cites the popular television show, "The Big Bang Theory", which stars a number of ultra-nerdy scientists and their cool, blonde, beautiful, "math-and-science-illiterate" neighbor, who waits tables and dreams of becoming an actress. The problem, Pollack explains, is that although these differences are caricaturized and made to be light-hearted, they do point to a very big problem: it is not very cool to be a scientist, or mathematician, or a software developer. This clash of personal identity and cultural expecation leads to an exageratted lack of interest, even to the point of denial [CITE]. Couple this with what Maria Klawe, now the president of Harvey Mudd College—which boasts one of the nation's leading computer science programs—calls 'impostoritis' and the problem is compounded. Impostoritis, she explains, is being "convinced that everyone could tell that I didn’t belong," despite enormous successes and qualifications [CITE]. What Klawe means is that even when you are doing just as well as your peers, if they all look uniformely different from you it is incredibly difficult to see equality and belonging through the cultural divides created by gender. This leads to a disconnect for women within STEM, which all too often results in their withdrawal—perhaps long before they would have actually been able to participate.
			B. School Issues 
				The idea that women simply lose interest in STEM before it comes time to choose a career is not an uncommon one. It shows up as a concept with widespread implicit support. In National Public Radio's "Addressing The Shortage Of Women In Silicon Valley", reporter Wendy Kaufman remarks, "it's no secret that beginning in middle school, young women often lose interest in math and science" [CITE]. Kaufman's claim is generally accepted and upheld by many Americans, as though there is a switch that suddenly turns off a girl's interest in these rudementary STEM disciplines. Pollack explains this phenoma further revealing that "In elementary school, girls and boys perform equally well in math and science. But by the time they reach high school, when those subjects begin to seem more difficult to students of both sexes, the numbers diverge" [CITE]. So despite growing and learning fundamentals in step with each other, when things get difficult girls suddenly tend to do worse.

				Pollack's question is what causes that switch? The idea that "boys care more" simply ignores too many complicated issues. One of the biggest problems is that "girls, no matter how smart, receive fewer arguments from their parents, teachers [and] guidance counselors" to stick out difficult territory in science and mathematics [CITE]. Pollack is getting at the idea that men are good at science and math, so when boys run into to trouble and think of dropping a course they are quickly reminded that men are good at this sort of thing and it is important that they ought to be. Girls, however, are not met with such enthusiasm. Klawe explains that during her own education "Professors would say to me all the time, 'Why do you want to be a mathematician, Maria? There are no good women mathematicians'" [How One College Is Closing The Computer Science Gender Gap]. This attitude greatly inhibits the ambition and depletes the student of the necessary grit required to get through difficult science and mathematics courses, leaving women and girls alone in an educational environment that requires a great amount of support—support that boys are more likely to recieve.
			C. Therefore Pipeline.
				--
		Conclusion
			--
	Synthesis: X argues personal, Y argues communal responsibility
		The debate over how to motivate underrepresented students in STEM fields revolves, essentially, around differing views of who this responsibility belongs to. 
Conclusion
	While there is much to be gained from either of these viewpoints, and each carries an array of well-informed solutions, they may each be simply treating symptoms of a larger problem. To get to the root, something more essential must be implemented, something which can reconcile these competing views in order to establish more lasting and consequential change.
